---
title: Denotational Semantics of Typed Lambda Calculus II — Domain-Theoretic Models
date: 2024-07-05 20:57:00 +500
math: true
categories: [Theory, Programming Language]
tags: [note, lang-en, PL]
---

## Recursive Definitions and Fixed Point Operators

To motivate the central properties of domains, we start from an intuitive discussion of recursive definitions. Recall from [*Easy Foundations for Programming Languages III — The Language PCF & Its Syntax*]({{ site.url }}/posts/easy_PL3/#recursion-and-fixed-point-operators) that if we wish to add a recursive definition form

$$\text{letrec } f:\sigma = M \text{ in } N$$

to typed lambda calculus, it suffices to add a fixed-point operator $fix_\sigma$ that returns a fixed point of any function from $\sigma$ to $\sigma$.

Therefore, we study a class of models for $\lambda^{\times,\to}$, and extensions, in which functions of the appropriate type have fixed points. A specific example will be a model (denotational semantics) of PCF.

We will use properties of ($fix$) reduction to motivate the semantic interpretation of $fix$. To emphasize a few points about ($fix$) reduction, we will review the factorial example discussed in that article. In this example, we assume reduction rules for conditional, equality test, substraction and multiplication.

Using $fix_{nat \to nat}$, the factorial function may be written $$fact \:\stackrel{\text{def}}{=} \: fix_{nat \to nat} \: F$$, where $F$ is the expression

$$F \:\stackrel{\text{def}}{=} \: \lambda f:nat \to nat.\: \lambda y:nat.\: \text{if } Eq? \: y \: 0 \text{ then } 1 \text{ else } y*f(y-1).$$

Since the type is clear from context, we will drop the subscript from $fix$. To compute $$fact \: n$$, we expand the definition, and use reduction to obtain the following.

$$
\begin{split}
fact \: n &= (\lambda f : nat \to nat .\: f(fix \: f)) \: F \: n\\
&= F \: (fix \: F) \: n \\
&= (\lambda f:nat \to nat.\: \lambda y:nat.\: \text{if } Eq? \: y \: 0 \text{ then } 1 \text{ else } y*f(y-1))\: (fix \: F) \: n \\
&= \text{if } Eq? \: n \: 0 \text{ then } 1 \text{ else } n*(fix \: F)(n-1)
\end{split}
$$

When $n=0$, we can use the reduction axiom for conditional to simplify $fact$ $0$ to $1$. For $n > 0$, we can simplify the test to obtain $$n*(fix \: F)(n-1)$$, and continue as above. For any numeral $n$, we will eventually reduce $fact$ $n$ to the numeral for $n!$.

An alternative approach to understanding $fact$ is to consider the finite expansions of $fix$ $F$. 

To make this as intuitive as possible, let us temporarily think of $nat \to nat$ as a collection of partial functions on the natural numbers, represented by sets of ordered pairs. Using a constant $diverge$ for the "nowhere defined" function (the empty set of ordered pairs). we let the "zero-th expansion" $$fix^{[0]} \: F = diverge$$ and define

$$fix^{[n+1]} \: F = F \:(fix^{[n]} \: F )$$

In computational terms, $fix^{[n]}$ $F$ describes the recursive function computed using at most $n$ evaluations of the body of $F$. Or, put another way, $fix^{[n]}$ $F$ is the best we could do with a machine having such limited memory that allocating space for more than $n$ function calls would overflow the run-time stack.

For example, we can see that $$(fix^{[2]} \: F)\:0=1$$ and $$(fix^{[2]} \: F)\:1=1$$, but $$(fix^{[2]} \: F)\:n$$ is undefined for $n \geq 2$.


## Partial Orders

A **partial order** $\langle D, \leq \rangle$ is a set $D$ with reflexive, anti-symmetric and transitive relation $\leq$. 

> Reflexivity means that $d \leq d$ for every $d \in D$, and transitivity means that if $d \leq d'$ and $d' \leq d''$, then $d \leq d''$. A relation is anti-symmetric if $d \leq d'$ and $d' \leq d$ imply $d=d$. Antisymmetry implies that there are no "loops" $d \leq d' \leq d$ with $d \neq d'$.
{: .prompt-tip}

> Any set can be considered a partial order using the **discrete order** $x \leq y$ iff $ x = y $.
{: .prompt-tip}


An example of partial order is the *prefix order* on sequences. More precisely, let $S$ be any set and let $S^\ast$ be the set of finite sequences of elements of $S$. We say $s \leq_{\text{prefix}} s'$ iff sequence $s$ is an initial segment of sequence $s'$. This gives a partial order $\langle S^\ast, \leq_{\text{prefix}} \rangle$.

If $\langle D, \leq \rangle$ is a partial order, then an **upper bound** of a subset $S \subseteq D$ is an element $x \in D$ with $y \leq x$ for every $y \in S$. A **least upper bound** of $S$ is an upper bound which is $\leq$ every upper bound of $S$. It is easy to see that if a subset $S$ of a partial order $D$ has a least upper bound, the least upper bound is unique (by antisymmetry).

If $\langle D, \leq \rangle$ is a partial order, then a subset $S \subseteq D$ is **directed** if every finite $S_0 \subseteq S$ has an upper bound in $S$. One property of directed sets is that every directed set is nonempty. The reason is that even the empty subset of a directed $S$ must have an upper bound in $S$.

It is easy to see that if $S \subseteq D$ is *linearly ordered*, which means that $x \leq y$ or $y \leq x$ for all $x,y \in S$, then $S$ is directed.

> Another example of a directed set is the partial order $$\{ a_0, b_0, a_1, b_1, a_2, b_2, ... \}$$ with $a_i \leq a_j, b_j$ and $b_i \leq a_j, b_j$ for all $i < j$. This partial order consists of two linear orders, $a_0 \leq a_1 \leq a_2 ...$ and $b_0 \leq b_1 \leq b_2 ...$ connected together so that $a_i$ and $b_i$ have upper bounds $a_{i+1}$ and $b_{i+1}$, but no least upper bound.
{: .prompt-tip}

A **complete partial order**, or **CPO** for short, is a partial order $\langle D, \leq \rangle$ such that every directed set $S \subseteq D$ has a least upper bound, written $\bigvee S$. It is easy to show that any finite partial order is a CPO.

> Any set can be considered a CPO using the discrete order.
{: .prompt-tip}

A non-example is that with respect to the ordinary arithmetic ordering, the natural numbers are not a CPO. The reason is that the set $\mathbb{N}$ itself is directed, but has no least upper bound. If we add an extra element $\infty$ greater than all the ordinary numbers, then we can have a CPO.

A trivial but very useful fact is that if $S,T \subseteq D$ are directed, and every element of $S$ is $\leq$ some element of $T$, then $\bigvee S \leq \bigvee T$. In particular, $\bigvee S = \bigvee T$ if every element of either set is $\leq$ than some element of the other.

In interpreting $fix$, we will be particularly interested in CPOs that have least elements. The reason is that every *continuous* function on a CPO with a least element has a fixed point, as we shall see.

> For a function $f:D \to D'$ on the sets of two partial orders $\langle D, \leq \rangle$ and $\langle D', \leq \rangle$, we say $f$ is **continuous** if it is monotonic and preserves least upper bounds of directed sets.
{: .prompt-tip}

If $\mathcal{D} = \langle D, \leq \rangle$ is a partial order with least element, then we say $\mathcal{D}$ is **pointed**. In this case, we write $\perp_D$ for the least element of $D$. When the CPO is clear from context, we will omit the subscript from $\perp_D$.

A simple class of pointed CPOs are the so-called **lifted sets**. If $A$ is any set, then we write $A_\perp$ for the CPO whose elements are $$A \cup \{ \perp \}$$, ordered so that $x \leq y$ iff $x=y$ or $x=\perp$. The CPO $A_\perp$ is commonly called "A lifted." We may also lift any CPO $\mathcal{D} = \langle D, \leq_D \rangle$. The result, $\mathcal{D}_{\perp}$, has elements $$D \cup \{ \perp \}$$, where $\perp$ is distinct from all elements of $D$. We order $$\mathcal{D}_{\perp}$$ so that $x \leq y$ iff $x=y$ or $x,y \in D$ with $x \leq_D y$.