---
title: Easy Foundations for Programming Languages IX — Henkin Models
date: 2024-06-27 11:15:00 +500
math: true
categories: [Theory, Programming Language]
tags: [note, lang-en, PL]
---

In this article, let us check out the denotational semantics of typed lambda calculus, which uses models to express the meaning of terms.

For most logical systems, a **model** provides a mechanism for giving mathematical meaning to each well-formed expression, in sufficient detail to determine whether any formula of the logic is true. For logic with variables, it is common to separate the assignment of values to variables from the general notion of model.

For example, an algebra provides a set of possible values for each variable and an interpretation for each function symbol. After choosing values for variables (by selecting an *environment*), we use the functions given by the algebra to determine the value of an algebra term. By doing this for two terms, we may determine whether an equation between algebra terms holds.

In a model for typed lambda calculus, we require a set of possible values for each variable and an interpretation for each constant symbol that appears in the signature. This means that we need a set of values for each type, and a specific one of these chosen for each constant symbol.

However, that is not all. We have to make sense of application and lambda abstraction. More specifically, suppose $A^{\sigma \to \tau}$ is the set of values of type $\sigma \to \tau$, and $A^{\sigma}$ is similarly the set of values of type $\sigma$. If $f \in A^{\sigma \to \tau}$ and $x \in A^{\sigma}$, then we need to be able to apply $f$ to $x$.

The simplest condition on models that would make this possible is to require that $A^{\sigma \to \tau}$ be a set of functions from $A^{\sigma}$ to $A^{\tau}$. The ordinary function application would give us $f(x)$ in the set of values for type $\tau$.

A subtle issue here is that we also need to be able to interpret every lambda abstraction, which means that every lambda-definable function will exist and must lie in the appropriate set of values. If we impose the stronger requirement that $A^{\sigma \to \tau}$ must be a set of **all** functions from $A^{\sigma}$ to $A^{\tau}$, then certainly every lambda-definable function will exist in the model, and we can interpret every well-typed lambda term as a value in the correct set.

What makes the model theoryof typed lambda calculus complicated is that we need to be relatively flexible about the interpretation of function types. We cannot simply say that in any model $\mathcal{A}$, $A^{\sigma \to \tau}$ must be the set of all functions from $A^{\sigma}$ to $A^{\tau}$. The main reason is that we need to be able to interpret constants such as $fix$, whose equational axiom forces every function to have a fixed point. If $A^\sigma$ has more than one element, then there exists at least one function on $A^\sigma$ without a fixed point. Therefore, if we force $A^{\sigma}$ to $A^{\tau}$ to contain all functions, we cannot have models for PCF, or any other typed lambda theory involving fixed points. This requires us to define models using a more flexible, and more abstract, condition on function spaces.

There are several equivalent definitions of "general models," which we will call **Henkin models** after [*Completeness in the theory of types*, L Henkin]({{ site.url }}/download/PL/Henkin.pdf). The definition we use has three parts. We first define typed applicative structures, and then specify two additional conditions that applicative structures must have to be models.

> This article is optional to read. Skipping will not influence the comprehension of later articles.
{: .prompt-info }

## Applicative Structures, Extensionality and Frames

A **typed applicative structure** $\boldsymbol{\mathcal{A}}$ for $\lambda^\to$ signature $\Sigma$ is a tuple

$$\langle \{ A^\sigma\}, \{ \mathbf{App}^{\sigma,\tau}\} , Const \rangle$$

of families of sets and mappings indexed by type expressions over the type constants from $\Sigma$. For each $\sigma$ and $\tau$ we assume the following conditions.

- $A^\sigma$ is a set

- $\mathbf{App}^{\sigma,\tau}$ is a map $\mathbf{App}^{\sigma,\tau} : A^{(\sigma \to \tau)} \to A^\sigma \to A^\tau$,

- $Const$ is a map from term constants of $\Sigma$ to elements of the union of all the $A^\sigma$'s such that if $c:\sigma$, then $Const(c) \in A^\sigma$.

It is hard to understand the concept just by reading this definition. The intuition behind this is that the term of type $\sigma$ will be interpreted as elements of $A^\sigma$. For any $\sigma$ and $\tau$, the application map $\mathbf{App}^{\sigma,\tau}$ lets us use each $a \in A^{\sigma \to \tau}$ as a function from $A^\sigma$ to $A^\tau$. Finally, the map $Const$ gives the meaning of each term constant.

An important part of the definition of Henkin model is that equality between elements of function types must be standard equality of functions. An applicative structure is **extensional** if it satisfies the condition

- For all $f,g \in A^{\sigma \to \tau}$, if $$ \mathbf{App} \: f \: d = \mathbf{App} \: g \: d$$ for all $d \in A^\sigma$, then $f=g$.

Extensionality means that $f,g \in A^{\sigma \to \tau}$ are equal iff $\mathbf{App}$ $f$ and $\mathbf{App}$ $g$ are the same function from $A^\sigma$ to $A^\tau$.

> Another way of saying this is that the function $\mathbf{App}$ must be one-to-one from $A^{\sigma \to \tau}$ into the functions from $A^\sigma$ to $A^\tau$.
{: .prompt-tip}

### Example 1

Let $\Sigma$ be any signature and let $\mathcal{H}$ be any finite or infinite type assignment $$\mathcal{H} = \{ x_1:\sigma_1, \: x_2:\sigma_2,... \}$$. An applicative structure

$$ \mathcal{T} = \langle \{ A^\sigma\}, \{ \mathbf{App}^{\sigma,\tau}\} , Const \rangle $$

may be defined by letting

$$T^\sigma = \{ M \mid \Gamma\:\triangleright\: M :\tau \text{ some finite } \Gamma \subseteq \mathcal{H}\} $$

and defining $$\mathbf{App}^{\sigma,\tau}\: M \: N = M \: N$$ for every $M \in T^{\sigma \to \tau}$ and $N \in T^\sigma$. For each term constant from $\Sigma$, we take $Const(c) =c$.

If $\mathcal{H}$ provides variables of each type, then $\mathcal{T}$ is extensional. In contrast, if $\mathcal{H}$ does not then some $T^\sigma$ may be empty. If $T^\sigma$ is empty, then any two elements of $T^{\sigma \to \tau}$ will be extensionally equal (vacuously), so extensionality will fail if $T^{\sigma \to \tau}$ has more than one element.

### Example 2

We may construct a "recursive" applicative structure using any enumeration $\phi_0, \phi_1, \phi_2, ...$ of the partial recursive functions on natural numbers. In this structure, each type $A^\sigma$ will be a subset of the natural numbers and application will be defined by $$\mathbf{App}^{\sigma,\tau}\: n \: m = \phi_n(m)$$.

For each base type $b$, we may choose $A^b$ arbitrarily. However, since $\mathbf{App}$ must be a total function, we must select the elements of function types more carefully.

> Recall that a **partial function** from a set $X$ to a set $Y$ is a function from a subset of 
 (possibly the whole $X$ itself) to $Y$. If $S$ equals $X$, that is, if this function is defined on every element in $X$, then it is said to be a **total function**.
 {: .prompt-tip}

 Specifically, for any function type $\sigma \to \tau$, we let $A^{\sigma \to \tau}$ be the set of all natural numbers that $n \in \mathbb{N}$ such that for all $m \in A^\sigma$, $\phi_n(m)$ is defined as an element of $A^\tau$.

 If $A^b$ is the set of all natural numbers, then $A^{b \to b}$ will be the set of all $n$ such that $\phi_n$ is a total recursive function.

 In this structure, although application is computable, it may not be decidable whether $n$ is an element of some $A^\sigma$. This application is not extensional, since there will generally be several natural numbers that all code (correspond to) the same recursive function.


### Frames  

 In place of applicative structures, it is possible to use a definition of model that assumes extensionality.

 Instead of letting $A^{\sigma \to \tau}$ be any set, and requiring an application map to make elements of $A^{\sigma \to \tau}$ behave like functions, we could require that $A^{\sigma \to \tau}$ actually be some set of functions from $A^{\sigma}$ to $A^{\tau}$.

 To be precise, a **type frame** is an applicative structure $$\langle \{ A^\sigma\}, \{ \mathbf{App}^{\sigma,\tau}\} , Const \rangle$$ such that

 $$
 \begin{split}
 A^{\sigma \to \tau} \subseteq A^{\tau(A^\sigma)}\\
 \end{split}
 $$

 and $$\mathbf{App}^{\sigma,\tau}\: f \: d = f(d)$$. In the formula above, exponentiation $A^B$ denotes the usual set-theoretic collection of all functions from $B$ to $A$. 
 
 Since $\mathbf{App}$ is always function application in any type frame, it is common to omit $\mathbf{App}$, writing $$\mathcal{A} = \langle \{ A^\sigma\}, Const \rangle$$. If $\Sigma$ has no constants, then we may also drop $Const$, and think of a type frame $$\mathcal{A} = \{ A^\sigma\}$$ as simply an indexed family of sets.

