---
title: Randomized Algorithm — Interger Programming
date: 2024-05-14 19:41:00 +500
math: true
categories: [Theory]
tags: [note, lang-en, algorithm]
---


Integer programming is a type of optimization problem where the goal is to find the best integer solution to a problem.

Integer programming is a powerful problem-solving tool used in many research fields. Its potential applications range from resource allocation decisions to scheduling problems. This article will provide an overview of integer programming, outlining its fundamentals and exploring how it can be applied in algorithm tasks by applying it on the congestion minimization problem.

## Integer Programming and Linear Programming

In an **IP (Interger Programming)** problem, we want to find an **integral** point that maximizes or minimizes a linear objective function under a few linear constraints.

Let $$ A \in \mathbb{R}^{m \times n} $$, $$ b \in \mathbb{R}^{m} $$, and $$ c \in \mathbb{R}^{n} $$. In the matrix form, the objective function of IP can be written as follow. ($$c^\mathrm{T}$$ denotes the *transpose* of $$c$$.)

$$ \max_{x \in \mathbb{Z}^n} {c^\mathrm{T}x} \text{,}$$

which is subject to the following constraints:

$$ Ax \leq b $$

$$ x \geq 0 $$

If $$x$$ is further restricted to $$\{ 0, 1 \}^n$$, then it is called a **0/1 IP problem**.

Below shows an example of 0/1 IP problem.

$$ \text{Maximize } 8x_1 + 11x_2 + 6x_3  $$

$$ \text{subject to } 5x_1 + 7x_2 + 4x_3 \leq 14 $$

$$ x_1, x_2, x_3 \in \{0, 1\} $$



In an **LP (Linear Programming)** problem, the point we want to find is not restricted to be integral. Namely, $$x_i$$ can be any positive real number.

LP can be solved in polynomial time. Examples of algorithms for LP include the [simplex algorithm](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Simplex_algorithm) and the [ellipsoid algorithm](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ellipsoid_method). However, IP is NP-complete.



## Congestion Minimization Problem

### Problem Description

Traffic congestion occurs when a volume of traffic generates demand for space greater than the available street capacity. Given a traffic route map, for a series of trips with given starting and ending points, we need to properly arrange the routes of each trip so that they are spatially staggered as much as possible to reduce congestion on the road. 

We can use a directed graph $$G = (V, E)$$ to model the traffic route map and $$k$$ source-sink pairs $$(s_1, t_1), ..., (s_k, t_k)$$ to model trips waiting to be arranged. Our goal is to find $$k$$ paths $$p_1, ... ,p_k$$ where each $$p_i$$ is from $$s_i$$ to $$t_i$$, such that the congestion of these paths is minimized. Here, for each edge $$e$$ in the graph, we define its congestion as the number of paths using $$e$$. Formally put, 

$$\text{cong}(e) = |\{ i \in [k] : e \in p_i\} | \text{.}$$

> $$ i \in [k] $$ is equivalent to $$ i \in \{ 1, 2, ..., k \} $$.
{: .prompt-tip }

The congestion of our arrangement for all trips (paths) is defined by

$$\text{congestion} = \max_{e \in E} \text{cong}(e) \text{.}$$

To minimize this congestion, next, we will turn this problem into the IP description format.

### IP Description

Let $$\mathcal{P}_i$$ denote the set of all possible paths from $$s_i$$ to $$t_i$$ for every $$ i \in [k]$$. For each path $$p \in \bigcup_{i=1}^{k}\mathcal{P}_i$$, let $$x_p$$ be an indicator variable such that $$x_p = 1$$ if the path $$p$$ is used and $$x_p = 0$$ otherwise.

Let $$ W \in \mathbb{N}^+ $$ denote the congestion of paths that we want to minimize. The congestion minimization problem can be solved by the following IP.

$$ \text{min } W $$

subject to

$$ \sum_{p \in \mathcal{P}_i}x_p = 1, \forall i \in [k] $$

$$ \sum_{i=1}^{k} \sum_{p \in \mathcal{P}_i : e \in p} x_p \leq W , \forall e \in E$$

$$ x_p \in \{ 0,1 \}, \forall p \in \bigcup_{i=1}^{k}\mathcal{P}_i$$

$$ W \in \mathbb{N}^+ $$

Solving this IP is computationally hard. 

Hence, we adopt the following strategy, which is a common approach in the design of approximation aglorithm.

1. **Relaxation:** Solve an LP relaxation of the IP by removing the integral constraint, and obtain an optimal fractional solution;

2. **Rounding:** Transform the fractional solution we get into the integral solution of the original IP, and hope that it solves the IP approximately.

> In general, IP is hard to solve. So, the high-level idea here is to transform IP into LP, and use the LP result to estimate the IP result.
{: .prompt-tip }

